[TT-13263/TT-13264] Add plugin development docs update (#5565)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: tyk-docs/content/product-stack/tyk-gateway/advanced-configurations/plugins/golang/go-development-flow.md

---
title: Custom Go plugin development flow
date: 2024-03-04
description: "Development flow working with Go Plugins"
tags: ["custom plugin", "golang", "go plugin", "middleware"]
tags:
    - custom plugin
    - golang
    - go plugin
    - middleware
description: Development flow working with Go Plugins
date: "2024-10-11"
---

> Go plugins must be compiled before they can be run. This applies to custom code that you want Tyk to run during the processing of API requests and responses in [custom plugins]({{< ref "plugins" >}}). In this section we describe the process and highlight important information that you must be aware of when working with custom Go plugins.

Reviewer: @titpetric regarding the steps shown in this page, is it for all versions of gateway or only for version `tyk-release-5.3.6`?

Because the live version of this doc has different initialization method for each version. Especially versions #[prior to 4.2](https://tyk.io/docs/product-stack/tyk-gateway/advanced-configurations/plugins/golang/go-development-flow/#initialise-plugin-for-tyk-gateway-versions-prior-to-v42)

Author: It's valid for the latest 5.3 LTS; previous versions would remain documented on their respective release branches. 5.3.6 is likely the minimum, due to the Go version bump, but this should apply to 5.3.7 and future 5.3 releases.

> For effectively developing go plugins, familiarize yourself with the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We recommend that you familiarize yourself with the following official Go documentation to help you work effectively with Go plugins:
```

> Plugins need to be compiled to native shared object code, which are then loaded by Gateway. For best results, knowing the restrictions of plugins is recommended. For maximum compatibility, Go workspaces are recommended, as shown below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Plugins need to be compiled to native shared object code, which can then be loaded by Tyk Gateway. For best results it's important to understand the need for plugins to be compiled using exactly the same environment and [build flags]({{< ref "product-stack/tyk-gateway/advanced-configurations/plugins/golang/go-development-flow#build-flag-restrictions" >}}) as the Gateway. To simplify this and minimise the risk of compatibility problems, we strongly recommend the use of  [Go workspaces]({{< ref "https://go.dev/blog/get-familiar-with-workspaces" >}}), to provide a consistent environment.
```

> ## Setting up your environment

Author: Note supported architectures/OS for the environment, native go plugins have limited env support

To develop plugins, you'll need:

> - Go based on the gateway version (from go.mod)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Go (matching the version used in the Gateway, which you can determine using `go.mod`)
```

> - Git to check out gateway source code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Git to check out Tyk Gateway source code
```

> - A folder with plugins to build

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A folder with the code that you want to build into plugins
```

> Set up a workspace, which, at the end, is going to look like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We recommend that you set up a *Go workspace*, which, at the end, is going to contain:
```

> - `/tyk-release-5.3.6` - the checkout

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `/tyk-release-x.y.z` - the Tyk Gateway source code
```

- `/plugins` - the plugins

> - `/go.work` - the go workspace file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `/go.work` - the *Go workspace* file
```

> - `/go.work.sum` - workspace package checksums

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `/go.work.sum` - *Go workspace* package checksums
```

> Using the workspace ensures build compatibility, matching plugin restrictions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the *Go workspace* ensures build compatibility, matching plugin restrictions.
```

> ### 1. Checking out tyk

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 1. Checking out Tyk Gateway source code
```

```
git clone --branch release-5.3.6 https://github.com/TykTechnologies/tyk.git tyk-release-5.3.6 || true
```

> The example checkout uses a particular `release-5.3.6` branch, to match a release. With newer `git` version, you may pass `--branch v5.3.6` and it would use the tag. In case you want to use the tag it's also possible to navigate into the folder and issue `git checkout tags/v5.3.6`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example uses a particular `release-5.3.6` branch, to match Tyk Gateway release 5.3.6. With newer `git` versions, you may pass `--branch v5.3.6` and it would use the tag. In case you want to use the tag it's also possible to navigate into the folder and issue `git checkout tags/v5.3.6`.
```

> ### 2. Preparing the workspace - plugins

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 2. Preparing the Go workspace
```

> The plugin workspace can be very simple. Generally you would:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your Go workspace can be very simple.

Generally you would:
```

> 1. create a .go file with code for your plugin

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. create a `.go` file containing the code for your plugin
```

> 2. create a go.mod for the plugin

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. create a `go.mod` file for the plugin
```

> 3. ensure the correct go version is in use

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. ensure the correct Go version is in use
```

> 4. add gateway dependency with `go get`, using the commit hash

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. add a Tyk Gteway dependency with `go get`, using the commit hash
```

> For implementation examples, see [CustomGoPlugin.go](https://github.com/TykTechnologies/custom-go-plugin/blob/master/go/src/CustomGoPlugin.go). We'll be using this as the source for our plugin as shown:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As an example, we can use the [CustomGoPlugin.go](https://github.com/TykTechnologies/custom-go-plugin/blob/master/go/src/CustomGoPlugin.go) sample as the source for our plugin as shown:
```

```
mkdir -p plugins
cd plugins
go mod init testplugin
go mod edit -go $(go mod edit -json go.mod | jq -r .Go)
wget -q https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TykTechnologies/custom-go-plugin/refs/heads/master/go/src/CustomGoPlugin.go
cd -
```

The following snippets provide you with a way to:

- `go mod edit -json go.mod | jq -r .Go` - get the go version from the gateway [go.mod](https://github.com/TykTechnologies/tyk/blob/release-5.3.6/go.mod#L3) file
- `git rev-parse HEAD` - get the commit hash so the exact commit can be used with `go get`

This should be used to ensure the matching between gateway and the plugin. The commit is used to `go get` the dependency in later steps.

To summarize what was done:

1. create a plugin, create go.mod,

> 2. set go.mod go version to what's set in gateway,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. set the Go version of `go.mod` to match the one set in the Gateway,
```

go work init ./tyk-release-5.3.6
go work use ./plugins
commit_hash=$(cd tyk-release-5.3.6 && git rev-parse HEAD)
cd plugins && go get github.com/TykTechnologies/tyk@${commit_hash} && go mod tidy && cd -
```

These are the final steps on how to create the workspace. The last step is used to update go.mod with the gateway commit corresponding to the checkout. After this step you're able to use `go mod tidy` in the plugins folder as shown.

With this step, the `go.work` file is created. It should look like this:

```
go 1.22.7

use (
	./plugins
	./tyk-release-5.3.6
)
```

### 4. Testing out the plugin

To test out the gateway/plugin build, you can now to the following:

```
cd tyk-release-5.3.6 && go build -tags=goplugin -trimpath . && cd -
cd plugins           && go build -trimpath -buildmode=plugin . && cd -
```

The above few steps build gateway, and the plugin. To test plugin loading:

```
./tyk-release-5.3.6/tyk plugin load -f plugins/testplugin.so -s AuthCheck
```

The command should output something similar to:

```
time="Oct 14 13:39:55" level=info msg="--- Go custom plugin init success! ---- "
[file=plugins/testplugin.so, symbol=AuthCheck] loaded ok, got 0x76e1aeb52140
```

> We can use the built gateway binary to test plugin loading without invoking the plugin symbol like a request would. However, as demonstrated, the plugins `init` function is invoked, printing to the log.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The log shows that the plugin has correctly loaded into the Gateway and that its `init` function has been successfully invoked.
```

### 5. Summary

> We've put together an end-to-end build environment for both the gateway and the plugin. However, runtime environments have additional restrictions which the plugin developer must pay attention to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the preceding steps we have put together an end-to-end build environment for both the Gateway and the plugin. Bear in mind that runtime environments have additional restrictions to which the plugin developer must pay attention.
```

> Compatibility in general is a big concern around plugins; since the plugins are tightly coupled to gateway, they need to be built with some consideration to the restrictions around them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Compatibility in general is a big concern when working with Go plugins: as the plugins are tightly coupled to the Gateway, they must be built with consideration to the restrictions around them.
```

Continue with [Loading Go Plugins into Tyk](https://tyk.io/docs/product-stack/tyk-gateway/advanced-configurations/plugins/golang/loading-go-plugins/).

## Common issues

### Plugin compiler

> We provide a plugin build environment to manage compatibility restrictions for plugins. The plugin compiler ensures compatibility between the system architecture and the go version for your target environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We provide a plugin build environment to manage compatibility restrictions for plugins. The plugin compiler ensures compatibility between the system architecture and the Go version for your target environment.
```

The plugin compiler also provides cross-compilation support.

Continue with [Go Plugin Compiler](https://tyk.io/docs/product-stack/tyk-gateway/advanced-configurations/plugins/golang/go-plugin-compiler/).

### Build flag restrictions

> It's a requirement that build flags for gateway match build flags for the plugin. One such flag that need to be included in builds is `-trimpath`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's a requirement that build flags for plugins match the build flags for the Gateway. One such flag that must be included in builds is `-trimpath`:
```

---
title: Custom Go plugin development flow
tags:
    - custom plugin
    - golang
    - go plugin
    - middleware
description: Development flow working with Go Plugins
date: "2024-10-11"
---

We recommend that you familiarize yourself with the following official Go documentation to help you work effectively with Go plugins:

- [The official plugin package documentation - Warnings](https://pkg.go.dev/plugin)
- [Tutorial: Getting started with multi-module workspaces](https://go.dev/doc/tutorial/workspaces)

> Plugins need to be compiled to native shared object code, which can then be loaded by Tyk Gateway. For best results it's important to understand the need for plugins to be compiled using exactly the same environment and [build flags]({{< ref "product-stack/tyk-gateway/advanced-configurations/plugins/golang/go-development-flow#build-flag-restrictions" >}}) as the Gateway. To simplify this and minimise the risk of compatibility problems, we strongly recommend the use of  [Go workspaces]({{< ref "https://go.dev/blog/get-familiar-with-workspaces" >}}), to provide a consistent environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Plugins need to be compiled to native shared object code, which can then be loaded by Tyk Gateway. For best results it's important to understand the need for plugins to be compiled using exactly the same environment and [build flags]({{< ref "product-stack/tyk-gateway/advanced-configurations/plugins/golang/go-development-flow#build-flags" >}}) as the Gateway. To simplify this and minimise the risk of compatibility problems, we strongly recommend the use of  [Go workspaces]({{< ref "https://go.dev/blog/get-familiar-with-workspaces" >}}), to provide a consistent environment.
```

## Setting up your environment

To develop plugins, you'll need:

- Go (matching the version used in the Gateway, which you can determine using `go.mod`)
- Git to check out Tyk Gateway source code
- A folder with the code that you want to build into plugins

We recommend that you set up a *Go workspace*, which, at the end, is going to contain:

- `/tyk-release-x.y.z` - the Tyk Gateway source code
- `/plugins` - the plugins
- `/go.work` - the *Go workspace* file
- `/go.work.sum` - *Go workspace* package checksums

> Using the *Go workspace* ensures build compatibility, matching plugin restrictions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the *Go workspace* ensures build compatibility between the plugins and Gateway.
```

Your Go workspace can be very simple.

Generally you would:

1. create a `.go` file containing the code for your plugin
2. create a `go.mod` file for the plugin
3. ensure the correct Go version is in use
4. add a Tyk Gteway dependency with `go get`, using the commit hash

As an example, we can use the [CustomGoPlugin.go](https://github.com/TykTechnologies/custom-go-plugin/blob/master/go/src/CustomGoPlugin.go) sample as the source for our plugin as shown:

```
mkdir -p plugins
cd plugins
go mod init testplugin
go mod edit -go $(go mod edit -json go.mod | jq -r .Go)
wget -q https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TykTechnologies/custom-go-plugin/refs/heads/master/go/src/CustomGoPlugin.go
cd -
```

The following snippets provide you with a way to:

- `go mod edit -json go.mod | jq -r .Go` - get the go version from the gateway [go.mod](https://github.com/TykTechnologies/tyk/blob/release-5.3.6/go.mod#L3) file
- `git rev-parse HEAD` - get the commit hash so the exact commit can be used with `go get`

This should be used to ensure the matching between gateway and the plugin. The commit is used to `go get` the dependency in later steps.

To summarize what was done:

> 1. create a plugin, create go.mod,

Author: ```suggestion
1. create a plugin folder, create a go.mod for it,
```

cd plugins && go get github.com/TykTechnologies/tyk@${commit_hash} && go mod tidy && cd -
```

The Go workspace file (`go.work`) should look like this:

```
go 1.22.7

use (
	./plugins
	./tyk-release-5.3.6
)
```

### 4. Building and validating the plugin

Now that your *Go workspace* is ready, you can build your plugin as follows:

```
cd tyk-release-5.3.6 && go build -tags=goplugin -trimpath . && cd -
cd plugins           && go build -trimpath -buildmode=plugin . && cd -
```

These steps build both the Gateway and the plugin.

You can use the Gateway binary that you just built to test that your new plugin loads into the Gateway without having to configure and then make a request to an API using this command:

```
./tyk-release-5.3.6/tyk plugin load -f plugins/testplugin.so -s AuthCheck
```

You should see an output similar to:

```
time="Oct 14 13:39:55" level=info msg="--- Go custom plugin init success! ---- "
[file=plugins/testplugin.so, symbol=AuthCheck] loaded ok, got 0x76e1aeb52140
```

The log shows that the plugin has correctly loaded into the Gateway and that its `init` function has been successfully invoked.

### 5. Summary

> In the preceding steps we have put together an end-to-end build environment for both the Gateway and the plugin. Bear in mind that runtime environments have additional restrictions to which the plugin developer must pay attention.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the preceding steps we have put together an end-to-end build environment for both the Gateway and the plugin. Bear in mind that runtime environments may have additional restrictions beyond Go version and build flags to which the plugin developer must pay attention.
```

> Compatibility in general is a big concern when working with Go plugins: as the plugins are tightly coupled to the Gateway, they must be built with consideration to the restrictions around them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Compatibility in general is a big concern when working with Go plugins: as the plugins are tightly coupled to the Gateway, consideration must always be made for the build restrictions enforced by environment and configuration options.
```

Continue with [Loading Go Plugins into Tyk](https://tyk.io/docs/product-stack/tyk-gateway/advanced-configurations/plugins/golang/loading-go-plugins/).

## Common issues

### Plugin compiler

We provide a plugin build environment to manage compatibility restrictions for plugins. The plugin compiler ensures compatibility between the system architecture and the Go version for your target environment.

The plugin compiler also provides cross-compilation support.

Continue with [Go Plugin Compiler](https://tyk.io/docs/product-stack/tyk-gateway/advanced-configurations/plugins/golang/go-plugin-compiler/).

> ### Build flag restrictions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Build flags
```

## Setting up your environment

To develop plugins, you'll need:

- Go (matching the version used in the Gateway, which you can determine using `go.mod`)
- Git to check out Tyk Gateway source code
- A folder with the code that you want to build into plugins

We recommend that you set up a *Go workspace*, which, at the end, is going to contain:

- `/tyk-release-x.y.z` - the Tyk Gateway source code
- `/plugins` - the plugins
- `/go.work` - the *Go workspace* file
- `/go.work.sum` - *Go workspace* package checksums

Using the *Go workspace* ensures build compatibility between the plugins and Gateway.

### 1. Checking out Tyk Gateway source code

```

> git clone --branch release-5.3.6 https://github.com/TykTechnologies/tyk.git tyk-release-5.3.6 || true

Reviewer 3: is it a must to have the directory named with version? eg. `tyk-release-5.3.6`?

Author: the version prefix yes (as discussed) ; illustration purposes, migration purposes...

### 2. Preparing the Go workspace

Your Go workspace can be very simple:

1. Create a `.go` file containing the code for your plugin.
2. Create a `go.mod` file for the plugin.
3. Ensure the correct Go version is in use.
4. Add a Tyk Gateway dependency with `go get`, using the commit hash.

As an example, we can use the [CustomGoPlugin.go](https://github.com/TykTechnologies/custom-go-plugin/blob/master/go/src/CustomGoPlugin.go) sample as the source for our plugin as shown:

```
mkdir -p plugins
cd plugins
go mod init testplugin
go mod edit -go $(go mod edit -json go.mod | jq -r .Go)
wget -q https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TykTechnologies/custom-go-plugin/refs/heads/master/go/src/CustomGoPlugin.go
cd -
```

The following snippets provide you with a way to:

- `go mod edit -json go.mod | jq -r .Go` - get the go version from the gateway [go.mod](https://github.com/TykTechnologies/tyk/blob/release-5.3.6/go.mod#L3) file

> This should be used to ensure the version matches between gateway and the plugin. The commit is used to `go get` the dependency in later steps.

Reviewer: > The commit is used to `go get` the dependency in later steps.

Can you elaborate on this, seem it requires a little context as previous command does have anything related to commit.

Author: editing issue, should be resolved
